this video is sponsored and approved by
curiosity stream antimatter it might
sound like the stuff of sci-fi the
engine of the Starship Enterprise in
Star Trek is powered by antimatter the
bomb in Angels & Demons that Tom Hanks
norisse's across Rome to stop is
apparently made of antimatter why even
Rick from Ricca Morty apparently makes
antimatter guns but antimatter is
actually a real thing it's part of the
natural world it's just incredibly rare
vastly outnumbered by normal matter
which physically speaking is really
weird so to study it we have to be able
to make some and for that you need the
huge particular accelerators like they
have at CERN in Switzerland I'm here at
CERN all this week I'm gonna be chatting
to the scientists who are working on the
antimatter experiments here to ask them
what is it where is it all gone before
we go find some particle physicists here
though to pepper them with questions
about what cool science they're doing we
should probably brush up on what exactly
is antimatter so antimatter is the exact
opposite of normal matter and what that
means is that for every property of a
normal matter particle that you can
measure is an antimatter particle has
the exact opposite value of that so for
example a proton it has a positive
charge of +1 we say but it auntie proton
has a negative charge of minus 1 and you
do the same thing for an electron as
well if antimatter particle is called a
positron because it's not negatively
charged like an electron it's positively
charged but what does all this mean and
why do we even care well antimatter was
made in the Big Bang at the same time as
all the protons and electrons and
neutrons the stuff that makes everyday
normal matter around us at the same time
or the antiprotons antineutrons
antielectrons
also call those positrons were also made
so how come everything around us now
including me the floor this camera I'm
recording on is now made of normal
matter not antimatter well when an
antimatter particle and a normal matter
particle meet they annihilate and that's
not an exaggeration
it really is doomsday levels they turn
back into pure energy essentially we get
like gamma rays out of that annihilation
process so somehow everything we see
around us has managed to avoid coming
into contact with an antimatter particle
in the early universe which suggests
that somehow there was more matter made
than antimatter so the question is where
is all that antimatter gone and why was
more matter created in the first place
so to answer this question of where is
all the antimatter gone people at CERN
are trying to make some antimatter in
order to study its properties in
relation to normal matter but don't
worry or anything you know they're not
gonna make loads of it like they too in
angels and demons because even the
antimatter they make here at CERN is
made in miniscule amounts like it only
adds up to something like an anagram of
antimatter compare that to the two nano
grams of positrons made at desie in
germany and the 15 nanograms of
antiprotons made at the Tevatron
Fermilab in chicago in fact if you took
all the antimatter ever produced by
humans in the history of antimatter
research and you were nigh elated it all
at once you wouldn't even have enough
energy to make a company
so antimatter is rare definitely
especially in comparison to the amount
of matter in the entire universe since
well it doesn't go very far until it
encounters a normal matter particle and
it annihilates with it but the
production of antimatter isn't exactly
rare in itself in fact every time you
eat a banana you're eating some
antimatter so bananas contain potassium
it's the reason we're told to eat them
right it's a health benefit but TAS iam
also has an isotope which is radioactive
so an isotope is where you have a normal
atom of potassium but you've shoved a
couple of extra neutrons into the very
center in the nucleus which has made it
unstable which means it radioactively
decays and when that happens it gives
off a positron the antimatter particle
of an electron
it's just when that happens after you've
eaten the banana you don't exactly
notice the amount of energy given off
when it annihilates with another
electron in your tummy almost makes you
kind of question why they even bother
like building these huge detectors to
make antimatter when they've just got
bananas lying around everywhere in the
canteens just like given up off the
drugs so if you're not a banana how do
you actually make antimatter
well CERN has the largest science
experiment in the world in the form of a
twenty seven kilometer long circular
tunnel a hundred and thirty meters
underground which spans the border
between France and Switzerland and in
that tunnel protons are accelerated to
close to the speed of light in two beams
which travel in the opposite direction
to each other
and in a few places along that tunnel
there's areas that you can bring those
two beams together so that they collide
and then there are detectors there to
record the fallout from the
collisions one of those detectives is
the LHCb experiment and its main focus
is studying the differences between
matter and antimatter
I've got LHC B particle physicist mark
Williams to take me down underground to
see the detector it's a really heavily
secured area and you need a rep discount
to access it now you can't quite
actually capture the scale of this thing
on film it didn't even feel like I was
underground at the time like the cabin
was so so vast as you can probably tell
from my rather stunned and speechless
expression I tried to mark in the LHC me
control room afterwards when we made it
back up to the surface about what the
LHC B experiment is actually trying to
do basically what we're trying to do
this is a bit of a cliche as we create
the kind of processes that happened
shortly after the Big Bang
so by colliding protons with very very
high energies together we can produce
both particles and antiparticles
randomly this is quantum mechanics so
there's some probability of producing a
Higgs boson with some probability of
producing a top quark if we do this
often enough we can get a good
collection of all of the various types
of particles and the anti particles and
then we can compare them so
fundamentally it's it's it's random it's
really is random this is quantum
mechanics at work we don't know for any
given collision what's going to happen
but when you collect enough collisions
on average you can compare what you see
with the predictions I was like a kid in
a candy store in the LHC B control
especially surrounded by huge boards
with these big red buttons to press and
I think mark knew I was overly excited
as well so he treated me to a little bit
of LHCb
astronomy tribute we're actually
affected by the moon among other things
okay the the beams when they're
circulating in this big ring you know
they're they spend a long time traveling
around and it's a big ring and obviously
the tidal forces on the Earth from the
moon can distort this ring shape so we
can actually see the
moving with respect to the ring or
rather the ring moving with respect to
the to the beams from the moon so the
collisions in the LHCb detector
essentially give us a random particle
generator but how does that let us probe
the differences between matter and
antimatter and get at this question of
where is all the antimatter gone and why
I've come to talk to LHC be particle
physicists are in a new to find out how
so if you can look at the LHC view logo
you can see it says LHC be and then it's
mirrored yes and the Seabee mirrored
becomes CP and there's a slash over
that's actually a very cool trick that
tells you what our experiment it's about
it's about CP violation so the slash
means violation now that's our fancy
term or the physicists term to
essentially say we're studying the
differences between matter and
antimatter so for us were how matter and
antimatter distinguish themselves is
through charge and parity so matter
becomes antimatter if you flip its
charge and if you flip its parity now if
there was a perfect symmetry between
matter and antimatter and CP you would
be a symmetry form but we know that's
not it so what we're studying is the
violation of this symmetry so whenever
you hear a physicists say CP violation
or CP asymmetry or you find an article
that talks about it this means the
difference between matter and antimatter
this is what we're studying this is the
main goal of our experiment actually so
how do you even test for this weird a
symmetry between matter and antimatter
the measuring decay rates is one way so
it's very simple if one particle of
matter decays in one way more often that
it's antimatter particle the
in its say analog way then you obviously
measured this so for every process like
this from the Timbo's matter there's a
opposite process involving antimatter so
what then the simplest way would be you
try to measure the rate so the frequency
of the events involving matter and then
the frequency of the events involving
antimatter now is there's an asymmetry
which we know in many cases there is you
will measure a different rate you will
see okay matter decays are more frequent
than antimatter decays so that's one of
the simplest possible ways to measure of
course that often doesn't cut it so we
have to go about inventing new a new
possible ways very indirect to study to
study this phenomenon so the LHC be
deals with decays of antimatter and
matter particles which happen in less
than the blink of an eye but what about
properly making and storing some
antimatter well that's the job in the
antimatter Factory and particle
physicists April Cridland as well who's
come to show me around this building
with the best name in the world this
entire building is actually a
decelerator so everywhere at cern we're
trying to go faster faster faster and
this is one of the few places where
we're trying to go as slow as possible
so it's completely the opposite for
everywhere else you going to see and we
don't rely on anything here running on
the LHC which is also surprises people
so we run from what feeds the LHC called
the proton synchrotron and that's going
really really fast spinning protons
around the ring and then those protons
they smash into a target and from that
target we get anti protons so everyone
in this building wants to work with
auntie protons
so what we're interested in an alpha is
making antihydrogen so hydrogen is one
of the simplest things you can look out
on the periodic table it's also
incredibly well studied so we know the
theory of it we have countless
experiments that measure all these
properties of hydrogen to really really
high precision so if we can do the same
with anti hydrogen we can then maybe
start to look for some differences we
can say okay are there any differences
between matter and antimatter we hope to
find some little difference somewhere
that gives us a clue to how we might
change the standard model which is an
excellent theory of the how the universe
works and other particles come together
but it just doesn't explain this
imbalance of matter and antimatter so
unfortunately we still don't have the
answers to that question of where has
all the antimatter gone hence why this
video is an unsolved mystery video
but as an astrophysicist whilst I was
there I couldn't help but ask April
about how gravity affects antimatter as
well so we have two experiments here
that are trying to study how antimatter
behaves in a gravitational field so
we've known for a long time that if you
if you're holding an apple say and you
drop it it falls to the floor because of
gravity right we're happy with this we
learn it at school but no one's actually
tested what if you had an anti apple and
you let go of it what would it do will
it go up will it go down will it do it
at the same speed no one's actually
measured it so there's G bar which is
just over there which aims to do a
gravitational measurement and freefall
but there's also alpha it's built a
brand new experiment it's only 18 with
Alpha Chi so what we hope to do is
create antihydrogen the way we normally
create it in alpha and then turn the
magnets off let it go see what it does
see if it goes up so if it goes down see
if it travels with the same speed we can
currently make over a thousand and two
hydrogen atoms in eight hours and what
what we need to do is we really need to
understand that the magnets within our
system very very well to be able to then
be sure what we're seeing of course if
we let it go and it went up the first
time we'd be very dubious about that
be retesting the system again and again
and again until we were confident that's
so close I'm always this thing I've
wondered about is antique like would you
call it anti-gravity do you think or
some people use the term anti-gravity
where we're holding back at the moment
until we have something something worth
saying and then we can see the fact that
we as humans as a species have managed
to come up with and design experiments
that allow us to answer questions like
where has all the antimatter gone
absolutely astounds me like you can't
help but be inspired by this place and
the people who work here were just so
excited and enthused to be working with
other like-minded people who care about
questions like this so when I look
around and I see the people working here
and I chat them I can't help but feel
like the question of where has all the
antimatter gone is not going to remain
an unsolved mystery for long so before
we get to the bloopers I just want to
say thanks to today's sponsor curiosity
stream without who this whole trip to
CERN wouldn't have been possible
curiosity stream is a streaming service
of documentaries and nonfiction films on
pretty much any subject you can imagine
so if you want to learn more about
particle physics after watching these
videos in more detail then they've got
you covered
I particularly like this documentary on
dark matter and the hunt for it because
you know as astrophysicist we're still
waiting for the particle physicists to
figure out what it is already tell us I
haven't covered dark matter on this trip
to CERN so if you want to know more
about the particle physics behind Dark
Matter search for on curiosity stream
and check out this documentary best
thing is it's only two dollars 99 and
for my subscribers enter the promo code
dr. Becky that's dr ve CKY
when prompted during the signup process
and your membership is completely free
for the first 30 days so click the link
in description and check them out now
and give them a big THANK YOU from me
for funding my dream trip to CERN well
what did you do what is it little well
where the hud-1 thing that really is
true is if something's broken almost
every solution is some form of turn off
and on again and it almost always works
so makes me feel so much better
in life we have to soft turn off and on
again the medium and then the hard turn
off known again the fact that we humans
as a species wish making spring change
were the hard
you